---
title: "Mandating Sex Education"
date: 2021-04-23T01:20:50-07:00
draft: true
author: "Vinay Pandey"
---

With the rising number of assaults on women in India, the image of our country has tarnished to an extent that Delhi is often termed as “rape capital of India”. as a Delhiite, I find it ignominious, however, it is certain that such crimes are happening all over India; they are just easily catching attention of media in Delhi because there he is capital of India and almost all big news networks have presence here. The government seems to be taking regressive steps to tackle this social issue. Which is ironic because the ministers have gone to extraordinary lengths to portray themselves as tech-savvy. the image of finance minister holding a tablet for presenting her budget is the first image which comes to my mind. Indeed, Modi's government has used technology extensively to make government faceless, and hence curb corruption. Which is why, it makes it ironic and in complete contradiction to the government’s attitude when they take draconian measures to ban pornographic websites. 

Such measures are totally ineffective and display not only the insipidity but also indifference of government to tackle such complex social issue. Firstly, the spread of 4G Internet has given a whole new Ave to the curious teenagers to explore their sexuality. Sexually explicit material is available not only via porn websites, but also on conventional media streaming platforms like YouTube, Vimeo etc besides that if authorities think they can prevent teenagers from watching porn by simply banning such websites they have underestimated their abilities by light years. By passing this ban is as simple as getting a VPN connection, or for that matter just downloading via torrents (besides countless work arounds).

Secondly, it appears that the bureaucrats and MPs have assumed pornography to be the root of all causes of violence against women. While porn films portray unrealistic depiction of sex, far away from reality, aren't films supposed to be an escape from reality? The violence, in my opinion, comes from unhealthy suppression of interaction between boys and girls, especially in rural areas. Couple this with the Internet, Hindi films, TV dramas all showing normal interaction between girls and boys which leads to dissonance in youths mind between expectation and reality. The only way to fix this is to remove artificial barriers erected by society and stop frowning down upon the interaction, instead treat it as important, and necessary part of growing up.

Thirdly, if sex education becomes part of curriculum at an early age, then the youths who are on brink of becoming teenagers will be better equipped to handle their teen years. They will know about the upcoming hormonal changes Ann will know about sexual attraction and how normal it is to feel such attraction towards another person. Importantly, the proponents of love jihad will subside automatically because there will not be anyone listening to them. 

Finally, over the course of generations, this will also break the obsession of Indians to have at least one male heir. This obsession has led to many social and economic issues, including population exclusion, disproportional gender gap and for this discussion, shrinking number of women in society has caused possibility of any interaction between man and woman to become almost non-existent. If there aren't women to talk to then you can preach about healthy interaction all you want but there won't be any interaction at all, and in cases where there are, two few females for every male then two there can't be any healthy interaction as too many boys vying for few girl’s attention will lead to either, them spooking out or, causing all out turf wars between them by bringing out the primate in us. This brings us to the conclusion, as we start teaching about 6 as part of curriculum, we will promote interaction between teenagers and also empower them to discuss and explore their sexuality in a non-judgmental environment, and it will, naturally, lead to them indulging in premarital sex. We must not consider it a taboo; what we must do instead, is to give them the Open dictation preferences knowledge, tell them about the good and bad and then trust them to make the right decisions. We will then see, over the course of few generations, that India has disentangled itself from the clutches of sexism and is no longer viewed as an unsafe destination for women.  
